Fiske Guide 2022

UC Davis
178 Mrak Hall, Davis, CA 95616
Website: www.ucdavis.edu
Location: Small City
Public/Private: Public
Total Enrollment: 38,634
Undergraduates: 30,982
Male/Female: 39/61
Financial Aid: 73%
Pell Grant: 32%
Expense: Pub $$$
Student Loans: 48%
Average Debt: $
Applicants: 78,093
Accepted: 39%
Enrolled: 20%
Grad in 6 Years: 87%
Returning Freshmen: 92%
Academics: AAAA
Social: TTT
Q of L:✩✩✩✩
Admissions: (530) 752-2971
Email Address: admissions@ucdavis.edu
Strong Programs: Environmental Science, Biological Sciences, Animal Science, Engineering,
Biotechnology, Agriculture, Food Science, Studio Art

The closest thing to a cow college in the UC system, but with cultured, pedigree cows. Described by the New Yorker as "the MIT of American fermentation." Premed, prevet, food science-you name it. If the subject lives and breathes, you can study it here. A small-town alternative to the bright lights of UC Berkeley and UCLA. As is often true at science-oriented schools, the work is hard.

At the University of California Davis, environmental science and most everything that has to do with animals, agriculture, winemaking, or biological science is note- worthy. The Aggies' cup truly runneth over. Originally established in 1905 as the University Farm, the campus maintains its sprawling, verdant beauty, replete with native and imported forestry, charming bike paths, and mooing cows. But lest you assume this environmentally friendly oriented university is full of quaint country folk right out of American Gothic, think again. UC Davis is a major research university and has become an international leader in the agricultural, biological, biotechnical, and veterinary sciences.

Located 20 miles west of Sacramento and 73 miles north of San Francisco, the 5,300-acre campus is located along the Capitol Corridor, skirting the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta watershed. It features a 100-acre arboretum and hundreds of buildings with a blend of architectural styles, from traditional dairy barn to the modern Sciences Laboratory building with its rooftop greenhouse. The hub of the university is a central area known as the Quad, one of many grassy open spaces on campus outfitted with hammocks, perfect for soaking up the abundant California sunshine. Recent construction includes the 75,000-square-foot Shrem Museum of Art, which devotes one-third of its space to education.

General education requirements aim to equip students with a breadth of knowl- edge to complement the expertise they develop in their chosen fields of study. UC Davis students are expected to address four core literacies: quantitative, scientific, and civic and cultural literacy, as well as literacy with words and images.

Biological sciences, economics, managerial economics, psychology, and an interdisciplinary program in neurobiology, physiology, and behavior are among campus's most popular majors. Animal science, engineering, and biotechnology are strong, and the agriculture program is one of the best anywhere. The school is "the number 1 choice for any prevet," according to one student, and it's great for pre- meds too. The food science major is also stellar and not for the faint of heart or those afraid of chemistry. It was Davis scientists who discovered how to optimize grape growing for California's wine industry and devised the method for creating orange juice concentrate. UC Davis's World Food Center is dedicated to innovating food production methods for improved human health and environmental sustainability. Studio art, boasting several internationally known artists, is also among the top in the nation.

"Academics are fairly intense, yet the students are positive and collaborative," says an economics major. Many introductory courses are quite large, and students complain that the average class size is on the rise, but UC Davis also offers more than 200 small freshman seminars taught by the best instructors. The quality of teaching can vary considerably, according to students, although "most professors are willing to hold extra office hours and make time for the students," says a psychology major.

Faculty members here are expected to do top-level research as well as teach, giving 41 percent of undergraduates the chance to work directly with professors and grad students as assistants in first-class research groups. The University Honors Program is for academically talented first-year and transfer students who want to enhance their education through special courses. Roughly 15 percent of students study internationally, frequently through the 50-plus programs designed and led by faculty in more than 30 countries. "You can study abroad essentially wherever your heart desires for as short as one month or upwards of a year," cheers one senior. The innovative UC Center Sacramento and the Washington Program give undergraduates academic credits for courses and internships in state and federal governments, respectively.

"Students at Davis are friendly, and you really feel a sense of community when you're here," observes one senior. Eighty-three percent of undergraduates hail from California, and 17 percent come from abroad. African Americans account for 2 percent of the students, Asian Americans 27 percent, Hispanics 22 percent, and multi-racial students 5 percent. The university's Office of Campus Diversity, Cross-Cultural Center, and academic success centers for students of various ethnicities help support diverse populations. Campus hot topics include social justice and sustainability. Davis awards merit scholarships averaging $6,800, and there are more than 250 athletic awards.

Only a quarter of undergraduates live on campus, although 92 percent of freshmen choose to do so. Campus housing is secure, well maintained, and includes a number of living/learning community options. "Dorms are really nice and new and air-conditioned," a student says. Three meal plans for the three dining halls offer a wide range of options, including vegan and kosher items at every meal. Food trucks are positioned around campus at lunchtime, and a weekly on-campus farmers market provides ready access to fresh produce. A senior notes, "Our fraternities, sororities, and student government have taken steps to address sexual assault and promote a stance against it.”

"Davis has a good social scene, but you have to put in the effort to find places and events you like," says a design major. Active drama and music departments provide frequent entertainment, and the 1,800-seat Mondavi Center for the Performing Arts features international and local groups. There are more than 800 student clubs, and fraternities and sororities attract 12 percent of the men and 10 percent of the women. While alcohol is allowed in the dorms for those of age, a senior says the party scene "can get dull, so a lot of students like to go out of town" for more vigorous nightlife. Major annual social events include Lawntopia, a student-run music festival; Picnic Day, in which alumni join current students in a massive outdoor shindig; nearly three months of cultural celebrations every spring; and the Whole Earth Festival, "an earthy, tie-dyed sort of event." Health and environmental consciousness run high here, and bicycles are the main form of transportation across the incredible 100 miles of bike paths that crisscross the campus and environs. "Bicycles are the norm at Davis. Don't come without one," advises one psych major. The university also sponsors sustainability projects and promotes such novelties as contests between residence halls for the lowest heating and electric bills.

In between quizzes and cram sessions, the surrounding communities offer a welcome change of pace. With its tree-lined streets and quiet nights, the city of Davis itself is small but has enough restaurants, activities, and entertainment to keep those who want to stay close to campus happy. The relationship between the college and town is one of unusual cooperation (partly because the students, who make up half the population, like to vote in local elections). A car can come in handy if you are looking for an urban night out in Sacramento (20 minutes) or a big-name show in San Francisco (a little more than an hour). Undergrads who lack wheels of their own can get around town for free on the student-run Unitrans bus system or head to UC Berkeley via an intercampus shuttle. Beaches are a two-hour drive from the campus, and the ski slopes and hiking trails of Lake Tahoe and the Sierra Nevada mountains are a little closer.

Most of UC Davis's 25 Division I varsity teams (the Aggies) compete in the Big West Conference. Men's and women's basketball and men's water polo are recent conference champions, and new programs have been added in women's beach volleyball and equestrian. The annual Causeway Classic football game against rival Sacramento State stirs passions, as do recreational sports: students are active in nearly 40 club sports and more than 25 intramurals. Given the Mediterranean climate, outdoor activities are popular, and almost everyone does something athletic- jogging, softball, tennis, swimming, or Frisbee-if only to break up their studies with a different kind of competition.

Proud of its small-town atmosphere, UC Davis is not for the lazy or faint of heart. As one student says, "There's no free ride. You are going to have to work for everything you get." And most students get a lot out of their four or more years at UC Davis. It's the ideal spot to combine high-powered work in science and agricul- ture with that famous easygoing California lifestyle.

Overlaps: UC San Diego, UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara, UCLA, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Cruz, UC Riverside, UC Merced

If You Apply To Davis: Regular decision. Does not accept the Common Application. Apply to a particular college, school, or program. Application includes optional question about gender/sexual identity. Please consult Davis's website for the most up-to- date information regarding standardized test requirements.

Brandeis

Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02453
Website: www.brandeis.edu
Location: Suburban
Public/Private: Private
Total Enrollment: 5,275
Undergraduates: 3,673
Male/Female: 39/61
Financial Aid: 60%
Pell Grant: 18%
Expense: Pr $ $$$
Student Loans: 46%
Average Debt: $ $ $
Applicants: 11,343
Accepted: 30%
Enrolled: 25%
Grad in 6 Years: 87%
Returning Freshmen: 93%
Academics: AAAA
Social: T T T
Q of L: ★★★
Admissions: (781) 736-3500
Email Address: admissions@ brandeis.edu
Strong Programs: Neuroscience, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Physics, Near Eastern and Judaic Studies, Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies, Theater, Music

Founded in 1948 by members of the American Jewish community who sought to expand access to education, Brandeis is an elite institution seeking top students of all faiths and backgrounds. Academic specialties range from the natural sciences to music and Near Eastern and Judaic studies. Has one of the top programs in neuroscience at a midsized research university. Competes with Tufts in the Boston area.

Brandeis University, founded to provide educational opportunities to those facing discrimination, has always had a reputation for intense progressive thought. Now it's being recognized as a rising star among research institutions, hosting more than 30 on-campus research centers, and is expanding its experiential- and service- learning offerings. The only nonsectarian Jewish-sponsored college in the nation, Brandeis appears to be focusing less on maintaining its Jewish identity and more on attracting a well-rounded, eclectic group of students from all backgrounds.

Set on a hilltop in a pleasant residential neighborhood nine miles west of Boston, Brandeis's attractively landscaped 235-acre campus boasts many distinctive buildings. The music building, for example, is shaped like a grand piano; the theater looks like a top hat. The 24-hour Shapiro Campus Center includes a student theater, electronic library, and bookstore. The Shapiro Academic Building houses the International Center for Ethics, Justice, and Public Life; the Mandel Center for Jewish Education; conference rooms; and faculty offices.

Undergraduates enter the School of Arts and Sciences, which offers more than 40 majors and 50 minors through its departments and interdepartmental programs. About half of the students graduate with double majors. The Brandeis core curriculum is rooted in a commitment to developing strong communication, digital literacy, foreign language, and quantitative-reasoning skills and an interdisciplinary and cross-cultural perspective. Freshmen must take a writing seminar and attend at least one of several Critical Conversation events held throughout the year, in which professors from different disciplines discuss major issues in a moderated setting, in an effort to "model civil discourse." Other gen-ed requirements include credits in health and wellness; life skills; diversity, equity, and inclusion in the U.S.; and difference and justice in the world.

Neuroscience, biochemistry, chemistry, and physics are top-notch programs; economics, biology, business, and psychology enroll the most students. The univer- sity caters to premed students with special advisors and access to internships and research opportunities. With the largest faculty in the field outside of Israel, Brandeis is virtually unrivaled in Near Eastern and Judaic studies; Hebrew is a specialty. The program in Islamic and Middle Eastern studies is strong too. A growing number of interdisciplinary programs are becoming increasingly popular, particularly the inter- national and global studies major and the health: science, society, and policy major. Brandeis also maintains a commitment to the creative arts, with strong theater offer- ings and a theory-based music program founded by Leonard Bernstein.

"Brandeis takes its academic integrity seriously," says a creative writing and English major, and the climate can be intense. Fifty-eight percent of classes at Brandeis have fewer than 20 students, and a junior says, "Professors are very accommodating and are good lecturers and discussion leaders." All incoming freshmen are assigned a student advisor, an academic advisor, and a faculty advisor. "Peer advisors are super cool because they have lived through the Brandeis experience and are truly a wealth of information," explains an American studies major. The Kraft Transitional Year Program is a one-year academic program for promising students from educationally underserved populations that guarantees small classes, rigorous academics, and strong academic support.

Rising juniors and first-semester seniors have the opportunity to earn credit through study abroad related to their majors. Forty percent of undergrads take advantage of more than 200 off-campus pro- grams in nearly 60 countries, including two university-run summer programs: an economics program in Copenhagen and a studio art and art history program in Siena, Italy. Undergraduates have numerous opportunities to conduct original research with faculty, and some even publish their work in aca- demic journals. The Justice Brandeis Semester allows groups of 10 to 15 students to earn credits while focusing on topics of personal interest, such as bio-inspired design, ethnographic fieldwork, or mobile app and game development. The linked courses feature fieldwork, internships, or research under faculty supervision.

"Brandeisians are friendly!" cheers a sophomore. "Everyone here is very warm and always willing to meet new people." Thirty percent of Brandeis undergraduates are from Massachusetts, and the population is heavily bicoastal otherwise, with sizable numbers of New York, New Jersey, and California residents. Twenty percent hail from foreign nations. Three chapels on campus-Roman Catholic, Jewish, and Protestant-are placed so that the shadow of one never crosses the shadow of another. It's an architectural symbol that students say reflects the realities of their diverse campus community. Less than half of undergraduates are Jewish. Muslim students, with an enrollment of more than 200, have their own dedicated prayer space, as do followers of Dharmic religions. African Americans make up 5 percent of the student body, Hispanics 8 percent, Asian Americans 14 percent, and multi- racial students 4 percent. Social justice is a big emphasis on this progressive campus. "Students care a lot about women's rights, LGBTQ+ rights, intersectionality, race relations, and a number of other issues," explains a theater arts major. With one of the highest tuition rates in the country, Brandeis began meeting the full demonstrated financial need of all undergraduates in fall 2019. It also offers merit scholarships averaging $14,500 to qualified students, although there are no athletic awards.

Housing options include traditional quadrangle dormitories, where freshmen and sophomores live in singles, doubles, or triples. Juniors and seniors can opt for singles, suites, or apartment-style housing. "Housing on... campus improves as you get older," one student observes. Freshmen and sophomores are guaranteed housing, while upperclassmen play the lottery each spring. Seventy-six percent of students live on campus, and the rest find affordable off-campus housing nearby. As for campus dining, a business major says, "Some days the dining halls have pretty good food, and other days it is terrible." The food court in the Usdan Student Center provides decent alternatives, and there are always kosher, vegan, gluten-free, and allergen-safe options. The university has opened a prevention, advocacy, and resource center on campus aimed at addressing sexual harassment and violence.

"The social life is lively, with on-campus productions, events, and activities pre- dominantly occupying students' free time," says an anthropology major. Brandeis hosts more than 250 student clubs; some of the largest include the Waltham Group (a community service organization), the Campus Activities Board, and Triskelion (an LGBTQ+ social group). The unofficial fraternities and sororities that have colonized at Brandeis are clamoring for recognition from the school but hardly dominate the social scene. Weekends often feature live entertainment at the on-campus Cholmondeley's Coffee House (a.k.a. Chums) and small dorm parties. Annual events include 'DEIS Impact, a social justice festival; the Springfest outdoor concert; and the 24-Hour Musical, in which students learn and produce an entire musical in just 24 hours ("It's a total disaster, but it's hysterical," says a sophomore). Also well attended are the homecoming soccer match and carnival and the Leonard Bernstein Festival of the Creative Arts.

The possibilities for off-campus diversion are nearly infinite, thanks to the proximity of Boston and Cambridge, which are accessible by the free Brandeis shuttle bus or a nearby commuter train. (A car is more trouble than it's worth.) Brandeis's host town, Waltham, has a diverse selection of restaurants and a cheap movie theater but otherwise receives lukewarm reviews from students. One global studies major asks, "Who needs Waltham for excitement when Boston is a short shuttle ride away?"

Though the school does not field a football team, the Judges athletic program gets a boost from its membership in the Division III University Athletic Association, a neo-Ivy League for high-powered academic institutions such as the University of Chicago, Emory, and NYU. The men's and women's soccer teams make regular NCAA tournament appearances, and women's basketball and softball are also strong. An extensive intramural and club sports program draws 42 percent of students, and contests run nearly every day of the year.

Few private universities have come as far as Brandeis so quickly, evolving from the bare 235-acre site of a failed veterinary/medical school to a modern research university of more than 100 buildings, a $1 billion endowment, and ever-growing academic opportunities. At the same time, it has cultivated a highly supportive atmosphere. One student sums it up this way: "Brandeis is a haven for students who are seeking academic challenge and an environment where social justice is revered, where they can hold leadership roles and collaborate with professors."

If You Apply To Brandeis: Early decision I and II, regular decision. SATS or ACTS or three exams from approved list: optional (applicants who choose not to submit test scores must submit a graded analytical paper and an additional letter of recommendation). Accepts the Common Application with supplement.

Overlaps: Brown, Cornell University, Tufts, WashU in St. Louis, NYU, Boston University, Harvard, Yale



